## placing time on a table and observing it for a bit

Time is one of those concepts that I think could have tons of different words for it, but somehow we just merged everything into one four-letter word. We all decided to take all the different representations of "time" and build one, coherent form of it in our communal understanding. Therefore, since we have one word for it, our brain never really recognizes the distinct types of time, because it just says "hey, there's another _time_, I'll recognize it as _time_." In our brain's training data, we labeled a bunch of images as the same thing, and so our ML algorithm doesn't require many graph dimensions for its line of best fit.

So, let's dive into what time actually is in all its forms and representations.

**Time is a tool.**
 - "I need some time" "Let's use this time well" "not enough time"

Time is a tool to make change and interact with the world around us. If our life meaning starts off as a blank canvas, time is the paintbrush we use to paint onto it. We use time as a straw to drink knowledge and as a sponge to absorb stimuli. It's our conveyor belt for processing information and emotions.

Time can be a strong tool or a weak tool, and we can be good or bad at using it.
Strong time is like those moments in which you feel like you can do anything you want to do, those 20 minutes in which you finish the thing you've been dreading doing for the past two weeks, and that month in which you grew more than you had in the past year.

Weak time is the time that we got from a sketchy online store, with 2 fake customer reviews, which doesn't do any of what it was advertised to do. Non-refundable. This is the 2-month Chloe Ting binge period we tried to use to get abs, or the hour we tried to use to make progress on an essay beyond just our name at the top.

We're good at using time when we maximize it in terms of our long-term goals, whether it's strong or not. If we used our strong time to send a bunch of emails, it's totally possible that sending those emails didn't really contribute to our long-term goals. We also could've used mail merge. Or delegated. Or just ignored them. But I guess sending them made us feel productive because strong time is incredibly satisfying to use. It's kinda like having strong pokemons; we gotta still know which ones to use for which opponents. _uses my strong time to create yet another Notion page to organize my life_ _22% effective_

Those are examples of using strong time or weak time to do things, but we can also use it to not do things. Sleep time is usually my favorite brand of strong time, even though you could argue our body is doing a lot during those hours, like outputting enzymes into our stomach or cleaning our brain. But in the traditional sense, the act of using time to not do can be as powerful in moving us towards our long-term goals as the opposite can be (e.g. not doing harmful things, or just letting our brain breathe).

**Time is a space.**
 - "Through the years", "we're almost there [at the end of this time period]"

We move through time; space-time continuum kinda thing. It's a movement that is constantly happening and we can't really stop it. When we enter reality, we're like a ball rolling down a hill, and we just keep going and going. Sometimes we get stuck somewhere; if we get stuck on something convex, we don't get stuck for long and we move on. It could be something concave, in which case we stop moving unless someone brings us back out. But generally, we are in constant motion through time.

In this sense, we have different time viscosities or states of matter depending on how the space feels to us as we move through it.

Low-resistance, low-density time is the time we fly through. We don't even realize we're moving so fast through it. We could be flying in circles and end up basically at the same place we started, post 3 hrs of TikTok. Or, we could end up on the other side of the world in a completely different place mentally after an hour of being with the right people.

Sticky time is the time that is kinda hard to get through. Someone spilled the honey on the counter and we're running our hand across the counter, and sometimes it moves easily and suddenly it gets stuck out of nowhere. When we have some grief or pain that we're still overcoming, we usually move through life like normal and out of nowhere, it hits us and makes time very sticky and hard to move through.

Non-Newtonian fluid time is the medium that gets harder to move through the more we try to move through it. Infinite boredom, or waiting for that decision email that's coming today. We put in every bit of mental effort into making that second hand move faster, but alas, it just moves more slowly.

In this weird reality we're constructing, our mind state is somehow connected to the space around us. This makes sense because we all are really just living in our own little minds. The viscosity of the space we move through is, for example, tempered by our mind's need for stimuli intake. The time of a car ride somewhere always feels stickier in a way than the time of the same car ride back, because on the first ride, our brain is like "wait wait wait there's so much new stuff to take in" and on the way back it's like been there seen that.

**Time is a frame.** 
 - "Good times", "bad times", "this year's goals", "a year of change"

Time is the reference frame we use to understand change and different states of being. When we look around at the world, at our past, at our future, time is the lens we use in order to synthesize, classify, and understand. And by this I don't mean our full understanding is a summation of the understanding of each millisecond, but rather our understanding is a kinda wonky weighted sum of similar sub-functions. A month may be classified as a "good month" if we had "some good days", and maybe there was a "really really good minute" in there, and then there were some weeks that were so incredibly neutral that they don't even go in the function. We understand things as narratives and as a collection of ups and downs. Every time reference frame is the novel we analyze to see if it was a good story or a bad story and is the picture frame from which we pick out our favorite faces and colors.
Our time frames can vary in size and resolution, like a photo.

Large time is like the way we understand New Year's resolutions and the way we understand a lifetime. We talk about if someone lived a "good life" or not. It feels vast and abstract, like coming out of a movie theater into the light and having to make immediate sense of what's around us. Large time feels like a wide expanse of possibility and we tend to fill our future large time with abstract dreams, ambitious goals, and myriad expectations.
Small time is a polaroid we can hold in our hands and hang on a string. It's a moment breaking out into laughter with a friend or a drive to the store. It's continuous and pure and simple, and it makes sense to us to classify it one way or another. Our future small time is like a task we know we will do, such as make the bed, or a specific experience we know we will have, such as enjoy a movie.

High-def time conveys lots of nuances and details, like the way we remember a trip in which we hiked for 3 hours, then got ice cream at the town's famous ice cream shop, then found that snowglobe to take home to the fam. It's the meeting a bunch of new people during freshman orientation or the first days of an internship. Our brain records pixels in the physical anchors around us such as people and places and in the emotions we feel such as excitement or anger. It feels like it was a lot of time because there's so much in it.
Low-def time is a blurry picture, like our time in quarantine, where we look back at this vast void of time and wonder what we actually did besides learn how to bake banana bread, and wonder if it was not a week instead of a year because there are no details to look at.

This is similarly survival mechanism-based and our brain fine-tunes our camera settings to capture or observe time differently. We can easily alter this by tricking our brain (e.g. memory palace = high-res time, mindless phone scrolling = low-res time, quantifiable goals = smaller time). The time frames we use are critical parts of the functions we use to determine our happiness and satisfaction with life and our growth.

**Time is a structure.**
 - ":00" ":30"

We wait until 10:00 am to get out of bed if it's 9:53 am, and we let the meeting run until 5:00 pm if there's only 12 minutes left. We instinctively cringe at a meeting booked at a random hour like 4:39 pm and we get anxious if we spend more than an hour eating lunch. Time is indeed a construct, or a structure, for ourselves, and it can be loose or strict.
Loose time is the time we have on break where we just kinda spend a whole day getting out of bed and making it to the kitchen to put food in our bodies. It can be a meaningful gift to people we love and it can be our worst nightmare when it consumes us.
Strict time is the minute we have to make it to class 5 minutes late, the hour we have on a zoom call, and the week we have to partition into 10 different work streams. It sometimes brings us peace, since we have filled our time with things and we have relieved ourselves of decisions, and sometimes brings us despair from feeling like we are just cogs in the machine of society and are an eternal slave to deadlines.

In an alternate universe, humans didn't have a way to keep track of time at all, no sundials nor 3 minute songs nor the monthly duo authentication re-login. Then they went insane, because everyone had to decide so much all the time. Whether to sleep in longer or not, whether to end the coffee chat or continue, whether to have lunch yet. Too much freedom!!
Okay I know in some way this is ideal - losing track of time is when we really enjoy life, and the invention of the water clock / hour glass was a little catastrophic because now we live in a society and this is why we can't have nice things. But, I do think we yearn for structure most of the time, and time provides that for us.

**Time is an ingredient.**
 - "Give it time", "with time, it got worse", "time heals"

My piano teacher used to always say I can't wait until the last moment to practice because the pieces need time "in the oven." This has made so much sense to me since then that I see a lot of things now as a cooking process. Things change in the background, and when we check on them, they're completely different from what we remembered. I think of time as not necessarily the literal "time" spent in the oven, but rather an ingredient of the recipe that significantly impacts the outcome (thyme, anyone?). Like all ingredients, the impact of time varies greatly based on what it's being mixed into, so I think it makes sense to classify based off of the effect it has on the overall recipe. (I'm a pretty mediocre cook so bare with me on these analogies.)

"Brings out the flavor" time is the time that takes an emotion and gradually amplifies it. When you test a sip, the flavor is overwhelming and you have no idea how some veggies put together with some chemical reactions could become this. This is the time that passes after various times of seeing each other in the hallways, talking until 3 am, and sending each other memes, and even though you convince yourself you don't have feelings for them, suddenly you realize you're just more and more in love with them. This time could also lead to intensified negative emotions about an experience, or real issues if something was left to fester.

"Covers up the bad taste" time is the time that distracts us from stress in unsustainable ways and helps us ignore our problems. In excess, it's like the over-salting that makes us unable to settle for non over-salted food. And with a lot of it, we're low-key anxious in the process since we're just feeding ourselves unhealthy food.
"Softens the spice" time is the time that heals wounds and quells emotions. An intense anger, 72 hours later, is a muted frustration that you can manage and reason logically about, without your taste buds dying. This kind of ingredient heals pain, wounds, and tense relationships.

I don't think we really have control over a lot of dishes, and a lot of times we're just handed recipes to deal with. A toxic relationship, no matter how well you cook it, with "Brings out the flavor" time it will be a pretty nasty dish, and better to throw it away before you even add that ingredient in. A hard experience is in need of "Softens the spice" time, which is made up of healthy coping mechanisms, and it can be a good dish in the end. Friendships from back home have lots of cinammony time ingredients that make them feel like good hot cocoa. The critical part of this representation of time is that it acts literally over time - in the oven, on the stove, etc. We can't rush any of these, and they are always acting on the things cooking in our life.

**Time is glass.**
 - "a beautiful moment", "take a second to observe", "stop and notice"

Finally, I think time is also a piece of glass, with different material properties. It surrounds us and we take in the world through this material.

A clean window of time allows us to observe beauty in life. We're in a white room with no lights and suddenly there's this window where we can peer out and see a beautiful, rich, colorful landscape that we take in like a work of art. It's those moments when we notice something differently, like the way a leaf curls, the way someone's hair falls next to their eyes, or the way a cello plays a high note in a recording.

A tinted window of time lets light in of different colors. Intense reds or deep greens stream in and envelop everything in the room. We never see everything in life like it really is, but we often see everything in life a certain way. This is those moments when we're filled with love out of nowhere and we feel a deep appreciation for every human around us. Or, when we feel angry and confused and like nothing in life really makes sense.
A mirror of time helps us see ourselves as we are. We're strolling through, minding our own business, and suddenly we pass a slightly reflective surface and either check ourselves out or realize our hair has been like that all day. This time is like those moments when you suddenly realize something about yourself you didn't really understand before, such as why you are the way you are or what makes you happiest in life.

You could argue these are just reflection mechanisms or exercises of appreciation/gratitude, but I believe they can only be classified under types of time. If they were just mechanisms or exercises, this would imply we can control when and how we do them. However, I think these come as spontaneously, unexpectedly, and uncontrollably as the passage of time.

Okay, now that I've laid out all these pretty analogies, I know you're thinking - well, there's already terms for all these. We already say things like "this was a hard time," or "that time flew by," or "that was a moment of appreciation." However, can you imagine if we didn't have terms for different colors? For a world this colorful, it would be so sad to label everything with "color" and assume that the distinctions between the colors aren't meaningful enough to merit different words in our language. To be clear, I think fully forced categorization isn't good, because if I have the time, I think it's so nice to explain that my favorite color is like the color of the ocean tide when it retreats from the sand, instead of just saying teal. However, having no terminology whatsoever pushes our brain to assume the default is every color is the same and we don't need to recognize the distinctions.

For all the different types of time that we have, it's insane to me that we still use one term for all of them, and default to having to explain the differences whenever necessary. The concept of traffic is completely different in our minds from the concept of emptiness. We therefore recognize that moving through traffic is a completely different experience than moving through emptiness, and if someone says they got caught in "traffic," we immediately understand and empathize. However, we still treat moving through time as pretty much the same no matter the context. We're so quick to judge whether a year was spent well or not, without even thinking about the nature of the time space of that year, and whether that time was sticky, or low-resistance, or non-Newtonian. If someone had a "tough year," we assume that objectively tough things must have occurred, rather than just tough time.

If there's one way I could change the English language, I would add definitions for all of these time types. I would add a word for loose, high-def time, so that I can create and give this to someone as a gift, and they can receive it in a little gift box and wonder what's inside the gift box and realize oh! it's my favorite type of time to receive: loose, high-def time. I would add a word for strong time so that whenever it appears, I can instinctively recognize it and analyze it like a small little bird until I can understand its characteristics and how I can build a cute little bird feeder that it will come to more frequently. And, I would add a word for A clean, "brings out the flavor" window of time so that I can constantly think about optimizing for this specific component in life, and so that I can discuss it constantly with others to understand how they experience beauty and emotions and meaning. Maybe, just maybe, with these added words, we can come closer to understanding that every person's human experience is incredibly complex and unique, down to every second and through every lifetime.
