## reflections from a now "social junior, academic sophomore"

5 weeks into my 2021 fall semester:

- Grad dorm life because MIT didn't have space for me in undergrad housing anymore
- Email in my inbox from a concerned prof. whose class I forgot I had to take this semester
- Mid-identity crisis, going to sophomore formal and approaching different friend groups to attempt to make friends

_record scratch_
Yep, that's me. You're probably wondering how I ended up in this situation.

Even though I was a royal mess this semester, I'm so incredibly thankful for the year I had before coming back to school. Taking a gap year was a privilege, especially during the remote school year, and with the state of the world and series of tragedies, it was even more of a privilege to have had an overall great year.

Someone asked me the other day what I've learned from MIT, and it caught me off guard. If you had asked me at the end of freshman year, I probably would have had a lot to say about how to make career choices, how to make friends in a completely new environment, etc. But my year _away_ from MIT helped me grow and learn so much, that in my mind those learnings were the only ones that were really relevant. Here goes an effort to preserve the main things I learned (not as much to share-- because I strongly think every person should take a gap year to learn things like these on their own!!). I learned a ton about society, people, communities, tech, etc. also, which I'll probably write essays about later, but for now I'll focus on life learnings, which personally impacted me the most.

### how it all went down

Turning back time to August, 2020, I was preparing mentally for a semester of virtual classes, but making the best out of the situation and thinking about how I'd get to hang out in person with people my age after a 3 month quarantine style summer in the suburbs of FL with my parents. I also agreed on a whim to sign a year-long lease for an apartment with a couple of friends since I found a $700 monthly rent my summer internship money could cover, and so my year was set out for me in Boston. My close friend Sofia from Yale had decided to take a gap year, but I didn't really consider it because I had cajoled myself into being happy about my current plan. Plus, I didn't know of anyone taking time off from MIT-- everyone was on the same page about just kinda getting college over with.

> Constantly reimagine your life.

My comfy situation was a tragic case of design fixation with my life, where I was finding ways to make it slightly better but I didn't consider how I could completely redesign my situation from scratch. We're subconsciously anchored to so many things; what our friends are doing, what our family expects, what we've already been investing time and resources into. If we're privileged, our basic needs are probably covered enough to the point where complacency rules over risk-taking. As important as it is to be actively grateful about your situation daily, I think it's equally important to constantly take a step back and analyze what your ideal situation is and if you can start building it now.

One day a LinkedIn DM popped in from someone named Coco, a junior at Yale, about an entrepreneurship program called Womxn Ignite. I remembered hearing about it earlier in the summer from one of my interviewers for a program, Ali Partovi, one of my biggest role models, but even then it had still stayed in the "this is cool" area of my mind but not the "I should do this" area. It's always the second time you hear about something, when you're already a bit familiar with it, that your brain decides to pay attention to it.

When I explain to other people what Womxn Ignite was, I say I was "living with 19 people I didn't know before in the middle of a forest", which is hilarious to me because it sounds so bizzare to other people but the aspects that sound bizzare were the ones I considered the least. I didn't really consider the fact that I didn't know anyone, or that it was in the middle of nowhere. My risk analysis mostly consisted of "will I be productive enough"/ "will I be learning as much," since the looming factor in my mind was the opportunity cost of not doing MIT. The program was technically limited to juniors and seniors, which in my mind checked the "pushing myself enough" box since I was a sophomore, and it seemed structured enough to enforce my productivity. Over ambitious, toxic productivity type beat leftover from my highschool self. But in addition to that, I was also super stoked to finally have time to focus full-time on a startup.

The last factor that pushed me to take the jump was my interview with Coco and Kendall. Their energy was infectious and I felt so genuinely excited that I even got to meet them. For a zoom call to give me energy instead of drain it - there was something there. After this, it was obvious to me that I had to go for it. Over the next week, I found a subletter for my apartment last minute and bought new plane tickets.

### womxn ignite (aug - nov)

We all congregated in a town called Philo, California-- a town with 0 covid cases, weekly drive in movies, wine tastings everywhere, and large stretches of forest and farms. Because no one was having weddings at the time, we took over a wedding location and flipped it into an incubator with an office space, whiteboards, and endless sticky notes (props to Coco and Kendall for setting up the dopest Silicon Valley show remake).

> The first thing I learned during these months was that I definitely want to go all in on my own startup at some point.

During college, it was hard to tell; working on side projects is stressful when you have 10 different things on your plate and push like 10 lines of code a week. These months allowed me to focus all my energy on building towards a vision I was excited about. It was hard but rewarding; recruiting a third teammate to work with us, jumping on over 30 in-depth calls with students and recruiters, making sense out of a million ideas/pain-points, and figuring out where to start. Fully focusing on a project gave me so much more energy to work on it, because of the daily moments like coming up with a cool feature idea over a lunch convo, talking to someone else about our vision for changing society, or hearing from a potential customer that they wanted to be the first to use our platform when we launched. I can't even imagine how energizing it must be to be able to jump head-first into a project with not just full focus but also no looming "return to college" pending.

Outside the startup work, I stayed connected to my MIT communities, bringing companies to talk for one of my hispanic student clubs, SHPE, and leading the semester-long education program for our entrepreneurship club, StartLabs.

One other fun part of my forest adventures was continuing to practice piano so that I could continue with the MIT piano program. A two-week shipping period after ordering, I received my electronic weighted piano keyboard and set it up in a shack outside our office space with a heavy-duty extension cord. Practice involved many nights staying later the rest, afterwards walking back alone to my cabin through the pitch black forest and along the highway up to my cabin. Once a week, early in the crisp, cold morning before the others arrived, I'd prepare the whole shack setup for optimal viewing and sound and have a virtual lesson with my teacher. Halfway through Womxn Ignite, we went on retreat to a summer camp location further south in CA, and there came with the piano with me. I felt like a little kid with everyone else being the supportive parents making sure I could keep up with my afterschool activiies.

> Keeping up hobbies / routines will never seem convenient a lot of the time.

In college, part of our tuition pays for ultimate convenience for everything; dining halls, gyms, practice rooms, study spaces, etc. in walking distance. It's natural to form routine and forget about most life factors like inconveniencing others or dealing with unexpected traffic/events. This makes it really hard, outisde of college, to rationalize sticking with routines or hobbies when everything seems so unstructured and chaotic, like it's never the right time, or place, or situation to do things in. It's even easier to push things off when you have this as an excuse, kinda like pushing off reading because you're waiting for that perfect hour when you can sit down with a cup of tea and a blanket and read (even though that will never arrive). I learned that if something matters to me, convenience should be irrelevant (to an extent that doesn't harm others). This involves either 1) building structure so that it _feels_ more convenient or 2) doing whatever possible to get it done no matter the inconvenience. The former means setting a time to do it every day, or finding an accountability partner, or preparing everything in my piano shack so that I'm more willing to practice when it comes time. Things that make our brain say "hey! it seems like it's a good time to do _this_." The latter means, if there's no way to mitigate the lonely walk home after practice, practice is non-negotiable either way and I need to do whatever possible to get it done every day.

The rest of the life story of the gap year piano: Packed it the last day, couldn't find a postal office open. Locals thought I was trying to ship drugs. Finally found someone to ship it for me. In Boston, it almost got returned to sender but the truck was delayed so I got there in time to rescue it at the postal office. Its life came to a tragic close when a roommate unknowingly threw it away. It had an honorable 1-year run :')

The highlight of Womxn Ignite was definitely the people - every single person I was living with was incredibly curious, driven, passionate, and kind. Every meal featured both intellectual and vulnerable conversations. We could go from talking about AI literacy to talking about our childhood experiences to talking about our ideal future cities. Every week, we'd have a "plate" (platonic date): a hangout with a random member from the group where we could get to know each other even better.

> How to form bonds with people through meaningful conversations.

This was an opportunity for me to go from 0 to 1, strangers to incredibly close friends, with 20 individuals, all of which I really vibed with, and I was able to truly understand how to navigate the process.

- I learned to tailor conversations less to the other person and more to what I'm excited to talk about. The people who I want as friends will reciprocate, whether the conversation is intellectual, deep, imaginative, fun, etc. This also means being vulnerable first, which has opened more doors for meaningful relationships that I thought it could.
- However, most of the time during conversations, I listened and asked questions. I learned to probe shamelessly and find what topics make the other person tick, whether it's their family backgrounds, their hobbies, or their music interests. I cut through small talk and get straight to the stuff that builds meaning and bonds.
- Probably also due to maturing past "relatable, cool teen" stage, but I learned to deflect less and have more real talk. High school me perfected the art of responding with memes/vine references or just cracking jokes to keep the vibes light. For group convos that usually flies, but for 1:1 convos I instead learned to actually talk about human things and thoughts and experiences without worrying about being boring.

The last day, we had a reflection period that lasted half the day. Tears were shed, hugs were had, and hair caught on fire (candle gone wrong). We each gave a speech to the group about how the experience had shaped us, and every single person chose to talk specifically about how the people had impacted them. Lidia went around and talked about each person's "superpower" and how each one was now a hat she would have ready to wear whenever she needed. Mine was about the specific memory I had with each person in which I felt suddenly closer to them. People talked about being "empowered," being "ignited." Like everyone else, I came out of these months at such a high point in life - deeply inspired and invigorated by a set of new, deep friendships I knew I could count on.

When thinking about the next semester, I had planned to return to classes right after Womxn Ignite, but the slippery slope had been slipped down. My second time applying to Facebook SWE, I got an offer and was able to secure it for spring, justifying my second semester off from school.

### boston / facebook swe (dec - april)

After CA I flew to Boston to finally make some use out of the apartment, with a super fun roommate named Rachel who was doing condom research at MIT, so we had some nice dildo decor around the apartment. I moved in and played house by buying all the kitchen stuff I needed. With Trader Joe's right next to my apartment, I learned to make dishes like savory stir fry and creamy pastas. My friend Kameron invited me over to his friendsgiving with his living group and we cooked the whole day and laughed nonstop. I spent my birthday with one of my closest friends, walking around Boston Seaport and dancing bachata in the park. A friend from back home visited and we played outdoors basketball at midnight and nerded out about space at the Boston science museum and planetarium. I had never felt like more of an adult, choosing exactly how to spend my time and with who. My social life was no longer a cadence of college parties and sorority events but rather a collage of unique moments spent getting to know my closest friends 1:1.

> Intentionality is key.

My gap year gave me complete freedom to design my social, academic, and professional life however I wanted-- a glimpse of adulthood with a lot of privilege since I wasn't tied down to a full-time career and generally had financial freedom. I was basically forced to be intentional about _everything_ and I realized the impact it has to not only be able to do what's best for me, but constantly _think_ about what's best for me. I've learned to apply this mindset even when I'm not forced to, which means things like inviting my friends to lunch instead of waiting to see who I bump into, choosing the books I read instead of picking the top recommended one, and forming my own ideal career before jumping into one that pops up.

Before coming back to Boston after, I spent the holidays in Colombia, playing chess with my dad and Parcheesi with my grandparents and exploring farms with my cousins. I met someone lovely who treated me well and matched my energy for music and startups, and we started a long distance relationship after I left Colombia.

In January, I came back to the humble apartment abode, and now that it was time to make a home for the next months, I set out to fix up the apartment. First project was getting rid of the mummy food in the fridge, then I had to tackle the nonfunctional sink, then the black stuff in between the tiles. And after that every other inch of the apartment.

> Building a home takes time.

This was my first time living on my own with my own kitchen, living room, etc. And I knew it wouldn't just be my place to sleep, but also my office space, hangout area, chef showroom, self-care space, everything. I spent around a week getting the apartment to an acceptable state, then throughout the semester it was a whole endeavor to continually keep it, and consequently my mental state, clean and tidy. The good thing was cleaning was my procrastination activity; preferable to whatever else I was pushing off.

My apartment roomies arrived in February, two in the other rooms and one, Grecia, sharing the room with me. Grecia and I both shared a passion for TJ Maxx, good scents, and being extra about our Hispanic background, so our room featured a variety of TJ Maxx essential oils and Colombian and Mexican flags.

Throughout the semester, I quickly settled into a routine: wake up 8 am, work out, breakfast w/ book, startup work, lunch w/ book, Facebook (west coast hours) work, dinner, stay late still doing FB work, practice piano, call boyfriend, sleep. Somewhere in that, I also was able to host the yearly StartLabs hackathon-style (virtual) event, continue my SHPE work, and lead the crisis committees at virtual MITMUNC.

I got burnt out really quickly. With all the things on my to-do list, I still had to sit down and work through 8+ hours of debugging for my internship project, which was initially a pretty tough project that I made harder for myself by leaving myself so little energy for it.

> It's important to balance routine with spontaneity and things that bring you energy.

Usually, this type of packed schedule for me is the norm, but this semester I had an unusually large amount of time spent on things that drained me (long coding hours alone, virtual events, way too much zoom, having to practice piano on a keyboard w/ low volume, etc.), and very little time spent on things that brought me energy.

This semester was also unusually lonely for me. COVID lockdown times in general had lots of this, but usually everyone was going through it at the same time, whereas I felt alone in my experience this time. These months I was very conscious of my roommates constantly coming back from parties and hangouts and my MIT friends spending every second with their living groups, while I lived in my little hermit shell of code, zoom, and cooking.

A few emotional breakdowns later, I started to disrupt the routine a little to add in some spontaneity and genuine social interaction. I scheduled coffee chats and started having exciting, interesting conversations again, planned lunches with my MIT friends and started eating lunch with people other than my book authors, signed up for a couple of hackathons and worked on some new fun projects, and invited friends to visit Boston and had adventurous weekends. During college, I underestimated the role of spontaneity (e.g. bumping into friends, meeting new people, trying new things) in my weekly routine, and while on my gap year I learned to build that for myself. After this, I was able to conquer both intentionality and initiative in how I structured my life for myself.

This phase of my gap year wasn't the most exciting or growth-inducing, but I've realized I needed that short "zombie" period to learn how to tend to myself better, as if I were a little plant with convoluted watering instructions that take some time to figure out. It also helped me enjoy the next phase a ton more. Lined up was a Ukraine trip, then Colombia again to visit the fam, then San Fransisco for the summer, then Spain for a conference later in the year, so being holed up for a few months before all this didn't hurt at all.

### edyfi / figma swe (june-aug)

May was a blur; half Ukraine adventures with my high school math team friends (so many stories to share) and half Colombia for two weeks with my boyfriend before ending things peacefully with him. It was a nice burnout recovery period after my Facebook months, and even though I was a little jaded about software engineering, I was ready to launch into my next internship, at Figma.

In June, I got picked up at the San Fransisco airport and met my first two new friends, Daniel, a coding genius who had worked on research and projects since he was a kid, and Connie, a walking beam of energy determined to fix educational systems. That was just two of the fifteen living in our hackerhouse in Daly City, a 20 min ride away from the heart of SF. There were two more similar houses, one in Mill Valley, above SF, and one in the Mission District of SF. We had all come together thanks to two brilliant souls, Ben and Luke, who dropped out of a college called Minerva University to build this program this summer, Edyfi, initially a network of 5 hackerhouses across the nation, composed of creatives, hackers, founders, and dropouts.

Just shortly after arriving at the house and taking in the faces of the people I'd be living with for the next three months (highest concentration of "tech bro-iness" I had experienced), we were all immersed in a conversation about nuclear technologies based on someone's research, Enrique, a 19-year-old who's postponing college to instead take down monopoly textbook companies with his project to redesign textbooks.

> Live with unique people who push you.

The house was a beehive of people constantly discussing and chasing big dreams. Many nights we'd stay up until 3-4 am for debates, philosophical discussions, or intense personal conversations. Co-living with 15 people was hard - lots of Zoom bombing, fridge food science experiments, and noise basically 24/7. However, it gave me the chance to live with incredibly brilliant people, each with a unique personal story, a passionate vision, and strong ideas and opinions to share. Living with them offered daily, genuine glimpses into their lives and spontaneous, meaningful moments that wouldn't have happened in any other environment. They pushed me in all the right ways-- to take more risks, be less of a perfectionist, be more spontaneous, dream bigger, and take everything less seriously. 15 housemates might not be sustainable in the long run, but it helped me fast track 15 deep bonds I'm incredibly grateful for, and taught me I want to be similarly intentional about my living groups in the future.

Throughout the summer, we had spontaneous night beach adventures, chased down famous founders we spotted in the streets around SF, went to founder mansion parties, and went tech happy hour hopping throughout SF. I started to see the same faces at events and WeWorks, behind each face a passion or startup vision they were fervently pursuing.

> Optimize for spontaneous opportunity at the start.

These months in SF opened up my world of entrepreneurship 10x more than what it was from my experience in the Boston entrepreneurship community. I found out what programs people were doing, which founders/investors were who, how founders raise funding nowadays, and exactly what the startup journey looks like at different stages. Being in SF made not learning these things almost impossible. It truly was a tech bubble - from the tech startup ads in the subway stations to the conversations you overhear at coffee shops. I met a ton of cool people who I stayed in touch with on Twitter (the new LinkedIn truly) and I've immersed myself in a network where everyone basically has mutual friends with everyone. This all happened because I was in an environment where there was 1) density of opportunity and 2) spontaneity. I was constantly surrounded by incredible entrepreneurship folks, and there were constant spontaneous interactions since everyone was looking to attend new events and meet new people. Though Miami and NYC are hype, I don't think any place accomplishes these two factors as well as SF for tech entrepreneurship. I realized SF is the perfect place to start off as a young person in tech, and then I can move onto other states/countries once my network of people and opportunities is in organic growth mode. More broadly, I've learned that optimizing fully for spontaneous opportunity at the start of a career in a certain industry is the way to go.

When I wasn't living it up in SF, I was coding away for my Figma internship, which I enjoyed a ton. I got to take on a whole set of new user experiences for Figma education users to make Figma more accessible for students and educators, which was right up my alley of social impact. This was my favorite work experience so far, not only because of my project, but also because I bonded with and learned so much from teammates through frequent 1:1s to talk about Figma-related or compeletely unrelated things. Every single person was individually passionate about their work and about Figma's vision. The zoom chat would blow up during all-teams with memes and people hyping each other up, and our Slack workspace was equally full of memes and community vibes.

By the end of these months, I had a solid vision of my end game post-graduation, and I can now easily see myself being a founder or working at exciting companies like Figma in PM/SWE. I'm so incredibly grateful for the self-actualization and empowerment component specifically of these experiences.

> The last thing I learned was how to nurture existing relationships.

My gap year featured a lot of moving around and a lot of new relationships. Constant context changes were disorienting and removed focus from my beloved friends from home or other places. However, by the end of my SF time I had found a strategy that worked for me for keeping my most important relationships strong. Similar to piano practicing, fitting it into my daily schedule was a muscle I've had to constantly strengthen. I found that with relationships specifically, scheduling isn't my thing, but instead I leave little spaces of limbo throughout my day, such as travel time, cooking time, or walks, in which I go through my Favorites list and spontaneously call friends, as if I was popping into their room to say hi. Most of the time they don't respond, but the times they do, this results in lovely impromptu conversations about what we're currently up to and what's currently on our mind. I might pivot to a new strategy in the future, but what I've learned that matters is to check in somehow in a thoughtful way, whether it's a simple text about something that reminded you of them or a quick call to say hi.

### post-gap year

In late August, I flew to Boston to start my sophomore fall semester at MIT, thankfully in-person now. After surviving my classes and finals this semester, I can safely say the transition back to classes at MIT after a year out of school is in fact possible (!).

Some shifts after coming back from my gap year:

- I was so excited about learning again. I relished scrolling through the course catalog to pick my classes and fantasized about sitting down in a library and studying from my notes. It wasn't the same drive from before to get good grades, but rather a passion for exploring unique curiosities or subjects I wanted to deeply understand, and choosing these specifically to focus on (and not caring about grades in the rest). Throughout the semester, I found so much more genuine energy for my classes this way.
- I knew what I had to focus on in college. I understood now the opportunity costs of dropping out and not dropping out. While choosing to stay at MIT, I wanted to take advantage of the most "MIT" things - deep diving into research, talking to professors, nerding out with friends, and taking niche classes. Though I've continued to work on side projects, I've focused on making the most out of the unique opportunity that is MIT.
- I felt more grounded and driven. My dreams seemed more real now that I understood how to get to them, and my values and short-term / long-term goals were now incredibly clear to me. I can now cut through all the noise of college (clout chasing, prestigious internships, social life and parties, etc.) and focus on what I know will get me to where I want to go, with the journey that will make me the happiest.

For anyone considering taking a gap year, I can't recommend it highly enough. And if you do, remember to take risks, be intentional, set goals for yourself, and embrace spontaneity. Seek opportunities to live with/ work with people who you can learn from, or, just take time to rest and reflect. College can wait :)
